MENTAL STRESS INDUCED MYOCARDIAL ISCHEMIA

Acute psychological stress has been associated with an increase in
myocardial ischemia,^1-5^ and has also been seen to induce myocardial
ischemia.^6-9^ Although the mechanism is not fully understood, mental
stress-induced myocardial ischemia (MSIMI) carries a worse prognosis
with a nearly twofold increase in risk of cardiac events and
mortality.^10^ Mental stress does lead to a different response from the
cardiovascular system as compared to exercise. There is a modest
increase in cardiac output, but during mental stress systemic vascular
resistance increases, as compared to the decrease seen during
exercise.^11,12^ Mental stress is shown to lead to changes consistent
with endothelial dysfunction,^13^ however the mechanism does not appear
to be through inflammatory markers and may instead by partially mediated
by neuronal nitric oxide synthase.^14,15^ While coronary vasomotor
function is affected by mental stress, there are also changes and
increases in peripheral vasoconstriction, however they differ by
sex.^16^

MSIMI is independently associated with anginal symptoms independent of
the presence of obstructive coronary artery disease,^17,18^ and is
associated with other psychological stressors such as anger and
depression.^19,20^ These psychological factors suggest neurological
structures may be indicated in the pathophysiology of MSIMI. We studied
brain correlates in those that develop MSIMI, and we showed an increased
activation to stress in the anterior cingulate, inferior frontal gyrus,
and parietal cortex during public speaking, with additional activity in
the left insula during arithmetic stress.^21^ We examined brain
correlates in those that developed stress-induced peripheral
vasoconstriction; we found increased activation in the insula and
parietal cortex and decreased activation of the medial prefrontal cortex
compared to control.^22^ Additionally, we showed that in several
individuals mental stress induces a coronary microvascular vasodilator
response measured as changes in coronary blood flow during angiography,
and that this microvascular response is endothelium‚Äêdependent and
correlates with peripheral microvascular function during mental
stress,^23^ suggesting ANS dysfunction as the likely basis for these
findings.

REFERENCES

1\. Denollet J, Brutsaert DL. Personality, disease severity, and the risk
of long-term cardiac events in patients with a decreased ejection
fraction after myocardial infarction. *Circulation.*
1998;97(2):167-173.2. Mittleman MA, Maclure M, Sherwood JB, et al.
Triggering of acute myocardial infarction onset by episodes of anger.
Determinants of Myocardial Infarction Onset Study Investigators.
*Circulation.* 1995;92(7):1720-1725.3. Taggart P, Boyett MR, Logantha S,
Lambiase PD. Anger, emotion, and arrhythmias: from brain to heart.
*Front Physiol.* 2011;2:67.4. Leor J, Poole WK, Kloner RA. Sudden
Cardiac Death Triggered by an Earthquake. *New England Journal of
Medicine.* 1996;334:413-419.5. Leor J, Kloner RA. The Northridge
earthquake as a trigger for acute myocardial infarction. *American
Journal of Cardiology.* 1996;77:1230-1232.6. Myocardial bloodflow
response during mental stress in patients with coronary artery disease,
Lancet(2000).7. Lacy CR, Contrada RJ, Robbins ML, et al. Coronary
vasoconstriction induced by mental stress (simulated public speaking).
*Am J Cardiol.* 1995;75(7):503-505.8. Schoder H, Silverman DH, Campisi
R, et al. Regulation of myocardial blood flow response to mental stress
in healthy individuals. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol.*
2000;278(2):H360-366.9. Schoder H, Silverman DH, Campisi R, et al.
Effect of mental stress on myocardial blood flow and vasomotion in
patients with coronary artery disease. *J Nucl Med.*
2000;41(1):11-16.10. Wei J, Rooks C, Ramadan R, et al. Meta-analysis of
mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia and subsequent cardiac events
in patients with coronary artery disease. *Am J Cardiol.*
2014;114(2):187-192.11. Al\'Absi M, Bongard S, Buchanan T, Pincomb GA,
Licinio J, Lovallo WR. Cardiovascular and neuroendocrine adjustment to
public speaking and mental arithmetic stressors. *Psychophysiology.*
1997;34(3):266-275.12. Arri SS, Ryan M, Redwood SR, Marber MS. Mental
stress-induced myocardial ischaemia. *Heart.* 2016;102(6):472-480.13.
Strawn WB, Bondjers G, Kaplan JR, et al. Endothelial dysfunction in
response to psychosocial stress in monkeys. *Circ Res.*
1991;68(5):1270-1279.14. Hammadah M, Sullivan S, Pearce B, et al.
Inflammatory response to mental stress and mental stress induced
myocardial ischemia. *Brain Behav Immun.* 2018;68:90-97.15. Khan SG,
Melikian N, Shabeeh H, et al. The human coronary vasodilatory response
to acute mental stress is mediated by neuronal nitric oxide synthase.
*Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol.* 2017;313(3):H578-H583.16. Sullivan S,
Hammadah M, Al Mheid I, et al. Sex Differences in Hemodynamic and
Microvascular Mechanisms of Myocardial Ischemia Induced by Mental
Stress. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol.* 2018;38(2):473-480.17. Hammadah
M, Al Mheid I, Wilmot K, et al. The Mental Stress Ischemia Prognosis
Study: Objectives, Study Design, and Prevalence of Inducible Ischemia.
*Psychosom Med.* 2017;79(3):311-317.18. Pimple P, Shah AJ, Rooks C, et
al. Angina and mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia. *J Psychosom
Res.* 2015;78(5):433-437.19. Wei J, Pimple P, Shah AJ, et al. Depressive
symptoms are associated with mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia
after acute myocardial infarction. *PLoS One.* 2014;9(7):e102986.20.
Pimple P, Shah A, Rooks C, et al. Association between anger and mental
stress-induced myocardial ischemia. *Am Heart J.* 2015;169(1):115-121
e112.21. Bremner JD, Campanella C, Khan Z, et al. Brain Correlates of
Mental Stress-Induced Myocardial Ischemia. *Psychosom Med.*
2018;80(6):515-525.22. Shah A, Chen C, Campanella C, et al. Brain
correlates of stress-induced peripheral vasoconstriction in patients
with cardiovascular disease. In: *Psychophysiology.* Wiley/Blackwell
(10.1111); 2018:e13291.23. Hammadah M, Kim JH, Al Mheid I, et al.
Coronary and Peripheral Vasomotor Responses to Mental Stress. *J Am
Heart Assoc.* 2018;7(10).
