HEART RATE VARIABILITY AND MOBILE HEALTH

Mobile health technology has become ubiquitously integrated in smart
devices (e.g. mobile phones, smart watches), using various measures of
physiologic parameters such as body temperature, electrical conductance,
photoplethysmography (PPG), and electrocardiography rate variability
(HRV).^1^ Of these, HRV is important for its association with autonomic
tone and mental stressors, such as depression,^2-5^ anxiety
disorders,^6^ and PTSD.^7-9^ Understanding the context of daily stress
and stress dynamics, through continuous measures, may allow for
individualized stress management.^10^ Multiple features derived from
HRV, such as the standard deviation in the beat-to-beat interval and
frequency domain measures, correlate with acute stress, and can be
monitored in real time.^11-13^ Biofeedback has become a common approach
to improve cardiac coherence, which uses measurements of high frequency
HRV in conjunction with controlled breathing to increase vagal
tone.^14,15^ HRV measured through ECG through 12-lead electrocardiogram
and through mobile device are not fully equivalent,^16^ although PPG
derivations of HRV from smart phones and watches do show high
correlation.^17,18^ Other modalities, such as accelerometry data, may
improve the accuracy of HRV in evaluating acute stress, but further
research is needed to identify the best measures for both acute and
chronic stress, as well as mobile-health based interventions.^10,19,20^

REFERENCES

1\. *Real-time mental stress detection based on smartwatch*: IEEE;
2017.2. Huang M, Shah A, Su S, et al. Association of Depressive Symptoms
and Heart Rate Variability in Vietnam War-Era Twins: A Longitudinal Twin
Difference Study. *JAMA Psychiatry.* 2018;75(7):705-712.3. Kidwell M,
Ellenbroek BA. Heart and soul: heart rate variability and major
depression. *Behav Pharmacol.* 2018;29(2 and 3 - Special
Issue):152-164.4. Autonomic dysfunction and heart rate variability in
depression, Stress(2015).5. Vaccarino V, Lampert R, Bremner JD, et al.
Depressive symptoms and heart rate variability: evidence for a shared
genetic substrate in a study of twins. *Psychosom Med.*
2008;70(6):628-636.6. Clinical and non-clinical depression and anxiety
in young people: A scoping review on heart rate variability, Autonomic
Neuroscience: Basic and Clinical(2017).7. Alvares GA, Quintana DS,
Hickie IB, Guastella AJ. Autonomic nervous system dysfunction in
psychiatric disorders and the impact of psychotropic medications: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. *J Psychiatry Neurosci.*
2016;41(2):89-104.8. Shah A, Vaccarino V. Heart rate variability in the
prediction of risk for posttraumatic stress disorder. In. *JAMA
Psychiatry.* Vol 722015:964-965.9. Shah AJ, Lampert R, Goldberg J,
Veledar E, Bremner JD, Vaccarino V. Posttraumatic stress disorder and
impaired autonomic modulation in male twins. *Biol Psychiatry.*
2013;73(11):1103-1110.10. Hao T, Walter KN, Ball MJ, Chang H-Y, Sun S,
Zhu X. StressHacker: Towards Practical Stress Monitoring in the Wild
with Smartwatches. *AMIA Annual Symposium proceedings AMIA Symposium.*
2017;2017:830-838.11. Park D, Lee M, Park SE, Seong JK, Youn I.
Determination of optimal heart rate variability features based on
SVM-recursive feature elimination for cumulative stress monitoring using
ECG sensor. *Sensors (Switzerland).* 2018;18.12. Park H, Dong SY, Lee M,
Youn I. The role of heart-rate variability parameters in activity
recognition and energy-expenditure estimation using wearable sensors.
*Sensors (Switzerland).* 2017;17:1698.13. Salahuddin L, Cho J, Jeong MG,
Kim D. Ultra short term analysis of heart rate variability for
monitoring mental stress in mobile settings. *Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology -
Proceedings.* 2007:4656-4659.14. *A smartphone based cardiac coherence
biofeedback system*: IEEE; 2014.15. van der Zwan JE, de Vente W, Huizink
AC, BÃ¶gels SM, de Bruin EI. Physical Activity, Mindfulness Meditation,
or Heart Rate Variability Biofeedback for Stress Reduction: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. *Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback.*
2015;40:257-268.16. Guzik P, Piekos C, Pierog O, et al. Classic
electrocardiogram-based and mobile technology derived approaches to
heart rate variability are not equivalent. *International Journal of
Cardiology.* 2018;258:154-156.17. Lu G, Yang F, Taylor JA, Stein JF. A
comparison of photoplethysmography and ECG recording to analyse heart
rate variability in healthy subjects. *Journal of Medical Engineering
and Technology.* 2009;33:634-641.18. Selvaraj N, Jaryal A, Santhosh J,
Deepak KK, Anand S. Assessment of heart rate variability derived from
finger-tip photoplethysmography as compared to electrocardiography.
*Journal of Medical Engineering and Technology.* 2008;32:479-484.19.
*Smartwatch: Performance evaluation for long-term heart rate
monitoring*: IEEE; 2015.20. *cHRV uncovering daily stress dynamics using
bio-signal from consumer wearables* 2017.
