**GENETICS**

The brain-heart interactions in psychological disorders have not been
extensively studied, with a majority of genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) limited to identifying genes and expression. In the literature,
there have not been systematic reviews of genes that examine the
relationship of genetic components to brain-heart interactions in
psychological disorders. We used the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) Phenotype-Genotype integration system, which merges
genome-wide association study (GWAS) catalog data from several
databases, including the NHGRI (National Heart Genome Research
Institute), Gene, dbGaP (database of Genotypes and Phenotypes), OMIM
(Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man), eQTL (expression Quantitative
Trait Loci), and dbSNP (database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms). We
conducted a phenotype-based search using MeSH terms for cardiac
arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, depression, anxiety, psychological
stress, and post-traumatic stress disorders, with a significance set to
p-value \< 1 x 10^-5^. We reviewed genes that had overlapping findings
between cardiac and psychiatric phenotypes, identifying the genes of
highest interest.

BIN1 (chromosome 2, rs10207628), a bridging integrator for synaptic
vesicle endocytosis, iss associated with SCD and depression and is
expressed in the brain. It functions include regulation of calcium ion
transportation, cardiac muscle cell action potential, and neuronal
differentiation. It is thought to localize to cardiac T-tubules and help
with cardiomyocyte release of microparticles,^1,2^ but also associated
with Tau protein in dementia.^3^

PHARCTR1 (chromosome 6, rs4615376), a phosphatase and actin regulator of
endothelial cell survival, is associated with CAD and depression and
expressed in the brain and heart. It functions include actin
cytoskeleton reorganization. It is thought to play a part in migraine
pathogenesis,^4^ and susceptibility for CAD in type 2 diabetes
mellitus.^5^

CNNM2 (chromosome 10, rs12413409), a divalent metal cation transport
mediator, is associated with CAD and depression and expressed in the
kidneys. It functions include magnesium ion homeostasis and
transmembrane transport. It is thought to be common among major
psychiatric disorders,^6^ a susceptibility locus in CAD,^7^ and
increases the risk of hypertension.^8^

PRTFDC1 (chromosome 10, rs11014306), a phosphoribosyl transferase domain
protein, is associated with SCD and anxiety/stress disorders and is
expressed in the brain and adrenal glands. It functions as part of
purine salvage pathways. It is thought to be part of the cardiometabolic
profile in heart failure,^9^ and also implicated as a predictor of
combat stress vulnerability in the development of PTSD.^10^

CDH13 (chromosome 16, rs8055236), a cadherin protein, is associated with
CAD and depression and is expressed in the brain and heart. It functions
in protein signal transduction, endothelial cell migration, and is
protective against apoptosis, provides resistance to atherosclerosis,
and is part of neural differentiation. It is thought to play a role in
the cardioprotective effects of sleep and in incident coronary artery
disease,^11^ and is identified in hyperactivity, impulsivity, violent
behavior, and extraverted personality traits.^6,12-15^

BMP2 (chromosome 20, rs6117734), a bone morphogenetic transforming
growth factor-beta protein, is associated with CAD and depression and is
expressed broadly. It functions as part of cardiac epithelial transition
and cardiomyocyte differentiation. It is thought to be associated with
depressive traits and stressful life events,^16^ cardiac progenitor cell
differentiation,^17^ and atherosclerosis in type 2 diabetes
mellitus.^18^

Other important overlapping genes included RORA (chromosome 15,
rs12912233), GRIN2A (chromosome 16, rs8058295), FAM155A (chromosome 13,
rs1509091), ENOX1 (chromosome 13, rs17538444), QKI (chromosome 6,
rs7756185), EGFLAM (chromosome 5, rs2561805), and SNX7 (chromosome 1,
rs11581859). The remaining coding genes included ACVR1 (chromosome 2,
rs35806662), MYL10 (chromosome 7, rs1722229), KSR2 (chromosome 12,
rs7973260), PARVA (chromosome 11, rs7120489), SNCA (chromosome 4,
rs356228), SORCS3 (chromosome 10, rs7074335), MAML3 (chromosome 4,
rs1877075), DCLK2 (chromosome 4, rs150175932), LPPR5 (chromosome 1,
rs1329461). Several pseudogenes were identified in addition that shared
overlapping findings in CAD, SCD, depression, and stress disorders. They
include RNA5SP87, RPL26P5, RNA5SP404, HSPE1P20, MTCO3P1, RPL6P18, and
MTCL1P1.

**REFERENCES**

1\. Xu B, Fu Y, Liu Y, et al. The ESCRT-III pathway facilitates
cardiomyocyte release of cBIN1-containing microparticles. *PLoS
Biology.* 2017;15:e2002354.2. Hong TT, Smyth JW, Gao D, et al. BIN1
localizes the L-type calcium channel to cardiac T-tubules. *PLoS
Biology.* 2010;8:e1000312.3. Zhou Y, Hayashi I, Wong J, Tugusheva K,
Renger JJ, Zerbinatti C. Intracellular clusterin interacts with brain
isoforms of the bridging integrator 1 and with the
microtubule-associated protein Tau in Alzheimer\'s Disease. *PLoS ONE.*
2014;9:e103187.4. Anttila V, Winsvold BS, Gormley P, et al. Genome-wide
meta-analysis identifies new susceptibility loci for migraine. *Nature
Genetics.* 2013;45:912-917.5. Qi L, Parast L, Cai T, et al. Genetic
susceptibility to coronary heart disease in type 2 diabetes: 3
independent studies. *Journal of the American College of Cardiology.*
2011;58:2675-2682.6. Smoller JW, Kendler K, Craddock N, et al.
Identification of risk loci with shared effects on five major
psychiatric disorders: A genome-wide analysis. *The Lancet.*
2013;381:1371-1379.7. Schunkert H, KÃ¶nig IR, Kathiresan S, et al.
Large-scale association analysis identifies 13 new susceptibility loci
for coronary artery disease. *Nature Genetics.* 2011;43:333-340.8. Liu
X, Chen L, Zhang Y, et al. Associations between polymorphisms of the
CXCL12 and CNNM2 gene and hypertension risk: A case-control study.
*Gene.* 2018;675:185-190.9. Yu B, Zheng Y, Alexander D, et al.
Genome-Wide association study of a heart failure related metabolomic
profile among african americans in the atherosclerosis risk in
communities (ARIC) study. *Genetic Epidemiology.* 2013;37:840-845.10.
Nievergelt CM, Maihofer AX, Mustapic M, et al. Genomic predictors of
combat stress vulnerability and resilience in U.S. Marines: A
genome-wide association study across multiple ancestries implicates
PRTFDC1 as a potential PTSD gene. *Psychoneuroendocrinology.*
2015;51:459-471.11. Li G, Feng D, Wang Y, et al. Loss of
Cardio-Protective Effects at the CDH13 Locus Due to Gene-Sleep
Interaction: The BCAMS Study. *EBioMedicine.* 2018;32:164-171.12.
Tiihonen J, Rautiainen MR, Ollila HM, et al. Genetic background of
extreme violent behavior. *Molecular Psychiatry.* 2015;20:786-792.13.
Terracciano A, Tanaka T, Sutin AR, et al. Genome-wide association scan
of trait depression. *Biological Psychiatry.* 2010;68:811-817.14.
Terracciano A, Sanna S, Uda M, et al. Genome-wide association scan for
five major dimensions of personality. *Molecular Psychiatry.*
2010;15:647-656.15. Salatino-Oliveira A, Genro JP, Polanczyk G, et al.
Cadherin-13 gene is associated with hyperactive/impulsive symptoms in
attention/deficit hyperactivity disorder. *American Journal of Medical
Genetics, Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics.* 2015;168:162-169.16.
Genome-wide environment interaction between depressive state and
stressful life events, Journal of Clinical Psychiatry(2016).17. Bylund
JB, Trinh LT, Awgulewitsch CP, et al. Coordinated Proliferation and
Differentiation of Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiac
Progenitor Cells Depend on Bone Morphogenetic Protein Signaling
Regulation by GREMLIN 2. *Stem Cells and Development.*
2017;26:678-693.18. Zhang M, Sara JD, Wang FL, et al. Increased plasma
BMP-2 levels are associated with atherosclerosis burden and coronary
calcification in type 2 diabetic patients. *Cardiovascular Diabetology.*
2015;14:64.
