INTRODUCTION

The mechanism underlying the interaction between cardiovascular and
brain health has gained traction over the last several decades, with
studies directed at determining how neurobiological phenomenon translate
into autonomic imbalances that affect cardiovascular health and
events.^1-3^ Specific stress and anxiety-related disorders have
subsequent increased cardiovascular risk.^4^ Depression and anxiety not
only an increased incidence for heart disease but also independently
increase cardiovascular mortality.^5-9^ Similarly post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) has an association with incident coronary artery disease
(CAD),^10,11^ which may be mediated through autonomic and inflammatory
pathways or explained by co-occurring physical and psychiatric
conditions.^12,13^

This review will highlight the current neurobiological evidence and
research on autonomic dysfunction, with a focus on sympathetic
overactivity as it relates to anxiety-based disorders, including PTSD
and depression. We will also discuss the population-based evidence,
including sex-differences, genetic, and epigenetic contributors for poor
cardiovascular health outcomes. We will highlight the role of autonomic
dysfunction, such as sympathetic overactivity, as well as immunological
network activation and inflammation. Finally, preventative and treatment
considerations will be discussed, including areas of future research,
that range from pharmacologic and behavioral modifications that directly
affect relevant neurobiology.

**Sympathetic Nervous System Overactivity in PTSD: Evidence from Human
Studies: Jeanie Park**

**Genetics / epidemiology (V. Vaccarino):**

***[Inflammation / Anxiety Based Disorders / Cardiovascular implications
--Felger / Marvar:]{.underline}* Inflammation and its Effects on Brain,
Behavior and CVD risk**

**Neuro-immune Mechanisms of Anxiety-Related Disorders and Increased
Risk for CVD**

**[Sex Differences in Heart Disease]{.underline}**

REFERENCES

1\. Calcagno C, Takx RAP, Ishai A, et al. Relation between resting
amygdalar activity and cardiovascular events: a longitudinal and cohort
study. *The Lancet.* 2017;389(10071):834-845.2. Richard Jennings J,
Allen B, Gianaros PJ, Thayer JF, Manuck SB. Focusing neurovisceral
integration: Cognition, heart rate variability, and cerebral blood flow.
*Psychophysiology.* 2015;52(2):214-224.3. Sgoifo A, Montano N, Esler M,
Vaccarino V, Biobehav N, Author R. Stress, behavior and the heart HHS
Public Access Author manuscript. *Neurosci Biobehav Rev.*
2017;74:257-259.4. !!! INVALID CITATION !!! 4-6.5. Depression and
coronary heart disease, Nature Reviews Cardiology(2017).6. Depression,
the autonomic nervous system, and coronary heart disease, Psychosomatic
Medicine(2005).7. State of the art review: Depression, stress, anxiety,
and cardiovascular disease, American Journal of Hypertension(2015).8.
Kyrou I, Kollia N, Panagiotakos D, et al. Association of depression and
anxiety status with 10-year cardiovascular disease incidence among
apparently healthy Greek adults: The ATTICA Study. *Eur J Prev Cardiol.*
2017;24(2):145-152.9. Pedersen SS, von Kanel R, Tully PJ, Denollet J.
Psychosocial perspectives in cardiovascular disease. *Eur J Prev
Cardiol.* 2017;24(3\_suppl):108-115.10. Boscarino JA. A prospective
study of PTSD and early-age heart disease mortality among Vietnam
veterans: implications for surveillance and prevention. *Psychosom Med.*
2008;70(6):668-676.11. Vaccarino V, Goldberg J, Rooks C, et al.
Post-traumatic stress disorder and incidence of coronary heart disease:
a twin study. *J Am Coll Cardiol.* 2013;62(11):970-978.12. Brudey C,
Park J, Wiaderkiewicz J, Kobayashi I, Mellman TA, Marvar PJ. Autonomic
and inflammatory consequences of posttraumatic stress disorder and the
link to cardiovascular disease. *Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol.* 2015;309(4):R315-321.13. Scherrer JF, Salas J, Cohen BE, et
al. Comorbid Conditions Explain the Association Between Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder and Incident Cardiovascular Disease. *Journal of the
American Heart Association.* 2019;8(4):1-11.
